minimalism is a watchword and people
manage to make money talking about it on
YouTube I don't dig it I don't support
it I don't have any reason to come on
and um insult and denigrate my fellow
vegans who were into minimalism
however some vegans very close to my
heart
um rep this cause so I've got to come
out and explain what I do not wrap the
cause I am NOT a minimalist and I am NOT
Pro minimalist I'm in fact an team in
most this may be my most controversial
video since I came out and admitted that
I am anti digital nomad Digital nomadism
was another one of these catchphrases
watchwords excuses for the unexamined
life okay let's start I got three
headings here I'm gonna dress minimalist
murder number one um in economics there
is a contrast between efficiency and
robustness these are not universal terms
is not like there's one definition for
all these words are used in economics
but it's still worth knowing about um
very often you'll have an efficiency
expert in economics who walks into a
hotel and sees a bunch of people sitting
around doing nothing and he says fire
those people you're making the hotel
more efficient however you may be making
the hotel less robust the guy who you
see sitting there doing nothing he may
actually legitimately be sitting there
doing nothing as part of his job however
when something goes wrong in the hotel
when one of the guests has a heart
attack it needs to be put into an
ambulance when one of the guests has too
much to drink and vomits all over the
beautiful carpeting in the hotel bar or
the hotel lobby whatever it is this guy
is sitting there doing nothing may have
to jump into action
maybe he jumps into action simply
replacing a number another member of
staff because somebody has to leave
their posts to deal with that crisis
maybe his skill is simply that he knows
how to drive a van maybe he is not the
most impressive person stuff maybe he is
worse at every
in the hotel than every other member of
staff so when he's on the front desk
he's worse than the front desk person
when he's in the back room doing stock
he's worse at the other than the other
people at doing stocking the shelves
he's bad at being a bartender he's bad
he but maybe he is bad at every single
job in the hotel but nevertheless he is
essential to the robustness of the
institution not to its efficiency
robustness and efficiency are totally
different and in some ways contradictory
concepts in economics and very very
often you do have a company that gets
rid of its capacity to do extraneous
things and then when there's a crisis
when there's some kind of unexpected
change in the market they find that
although they became very efficient at
doing just one thing under one set of
circumstances and at one set of
conditions they have in fact lost the
robustness to needed to adapt they have
lost the robustus they need to cope with
unforeseen circumstances now I chose to
use an example starting off in human
resources it's very easy to hate the guy
who seems to be sitting there doing
nothing in the same way when we switch
into inanimate objects it's very easy to
look at the mess in a garage it's very
easy to look at an old box of tools that
are disorganized and miscellaneous and
say I don't want the mess I don't want
the fuss I don't want the redundancy but
what you see is eliminating redundancy
just like this guy in the hotel may in
fact be eliminating robustness there is
power in having a garage full of
miscellaneous disorganized tools maybe
tools you didn't buy maybe tools that
have been there since your grandfather
gave them to you maybe you have a couple
different boxes of tools that are just
organized by size and when there's a
problem an unforeseen problem you didn't
think you'd have you can go to those
boxes and rummage through them and find
what you're looking for
this is totally antithetical to
minimalism minimalism as an aesthetic
minimalism as a life style man and
minimalism as a philosophy and believe
me I'm aware there's more than one
definition of minimalism out there I'm
gonna get to
one of them a little bit later in this
video in fact the type of robustness the
being prepared for unforeseen
circumstances which is built into for
example the clutter of an old kitchen
drawer a kitchen drawer that doesn't
just contain tools that you bought
yourself it's not minimalistic it's not
sleazy but we may contain tools that
your mother gave you and your
grandmother gave you it may contain some
tools you forgot you owned the tools you
think you'd never use there's an old
melon baller there's an there were three
different types of can opener and there
why do you need three types of can
opener you don't need them or you don't
think you need them and then there's
some circumstance when you think god how
do I open this thing how do I cope with
this problem and you open up that drawer
and you start going through you start
rummaging around and you find that stuff
the the so-called minimalist lifestyle
in fact is eliminating this robustness
from your life and this type of
robustness it can apply to things like
books having reference books you can get
a handle on it can reply to it can apply
to tools it can apply to people what you
may think of as redundancy and mess and
clutter can in fact be crucial to
productivity um I actually once when I
first got involved with Buddhist
philosophy and Buddhism as a religion uh
there was a woman in my life not my
girlfriend not by any stretch of
imagination my girlfriend we had a
somewhat bizarre relationship but I
can't call it romantic but I remember
there was a woman in my life and she
asked me quite ferociously she wasn't
anti Buddhist but she was kind of anti
organized religion she said why would
you why would you ever want to identify
yourself with Buddhism like even if you
want to study yet why would you call
yourself a Buddhist I now call myself an
expletive um and I remember what I said
to her was you know to me Buddhist
philosophy is just like discovering you
know having studied so much European
philosophy Western philosophy it's like
you're in an old house and you open a
drawer you never thought to open before
and you find the most remarkable
assortment of forks and knives and can
openers
and you know what it's a little bit
dangerous if it's dark if you're not
paying attention if you put your hand in
there you might get cut but it's useful
and it's useful ways you maybe can't
quite anticipate you know I discovered
Buddhist philosophy like a wonderful
drawer full of forks and knives forks
and knives and perhaps some kitchen
tools we we don't quite have any use for
now look one of the definitions
circulating for minimalism is that you
only own things you only keep things
that give you joy so you can tell them
glancing down normally I have no notes
at all but I wrote that down because I
didn't want to misrepresent the people
might disagree with to me this is still
consumerism that fundamentally that is
simply consumerism with a different
aesthetic buying and owning things that
give you joy is consumerism period and
the examples I had at the beginning of
this video
are actually not consumerist they're not
based on things that give you joy
robustness is about preparation it's
about its it's not about efficiency
it's not about productivity it's about
being able to cope with unforeseen
circumstances which to me is a set of
criteria that aren't hostile to
consumerism but are actually completely
separate from and and different from
consumerism whereas the idea of only
owning things that give you joy this is
a consumer fantasy that's all what is
this is this is simply consumerism with
this somewhat different aesthetic you
know you can own a black t-shirt or a
white t-shirt and it's still consumerism
doesn't doesn't change anything just to
throw in an example I mean I I did for
many years I lived out of a backpack I
had no choice I did humanitarian work I
had no home I had to be able to relocate
at any given time so each and every
possession that I owned had to be
examined carefully nevertheless my
aesthetic was not minimalist it was
pragmatist
it was pragmatic I would say it was
instrumentalist it was looking at the
things in my life as
tools and not to make me happy not
enough for any of these you know
aesthetic reasons not for reasons of
self-indulgence but it reflected the
same aesthetic of being prepared that
frankly is part and parcel of why I work
out of the gym you guys heard me say
that before I don't work out the doom to
be beautiful I work out of the gym so
I'm prepared for the unexpected I'm
prepared for violence I'm prepared for a
fist fight or a knife fight that breaks
out in the street I'm prepared to be
thrown down a flight of stairs and get
up afterwards that's the kind of
preparation when I was doing
humanitarian work I've been involved
with humanitarian work of various kinds
but I only had one job that actually
involved sacks of rice been given to
starving people like humanitarian
working that really simple sense I
remember I was packing up before leaving
the capital city and my friend of mine
there he saw the stuff I had kind of
laid out like on and around the suitcase
it was the final stage of putting stuff
into the suitcase and you know when I
got it I was going from the city to a
town and then you go from the town to
the remote village the real remote
frontier where people were starving some
of the time where they had extreme
poverty and there was a very bright and
eye catching steel chain not quite a
chain a steel cable it's coated in
bright red plastic so that it couldn't
rust
I remember this guy knew I mean I had no
choice in this sense but to be
minimalistic each every pound mattered
everything I put in that suitcase matter
don't have so much space in the suitcase
only so much weight you can carry yeah
why why are you taking that why are you
taking a solid steel cable a solid steel
rust-proof cakewalk I looked at him I
said I don't know yet I could imagine a
lot of situations being out in the
middle of nowhere and Laos where that
solid steel cable could be useful life
or death situations all kinds of
situations and just once
our little Akane team called a car or a
little third-world vehicle trundle
trundling along we didn't get stuck
where the road had collapsed but another
vehicle in front of us had and I got out
that tow cable it was a solid steel
cable strong enough to tow a car strong
enough to keep a boat tethered to the
side of the river like you know there
were all kinds of circumstances I can
imagine including some I'm not gonna say
on the internet where you might have to
use a tool of that kind so you know this
is a heavy solid steel object I carried
with me not for any specific purpose but
for many possible purposes all right if
you call this minimalism why is it about
maximizing your enjoyment in life to me
well you guys call minimalism it's not
pragmatism it's not this is simply
another form of consumerism and this is
simply a new meson valour for
consumerism because all you're saying is
that you're trying to be happy you're
trying to enjoy yourself and your
enjoyment of life includes a certain
kind of carefree disregard for the
future a certain kind of lack of
preparation for the future a certain
kind of lack of responsibility a lack of
devil-may-care relaxed attitude okay so
what like if you inherit you know your
grandmother's house and let's say it has
all those tools in the garage and it has
the drawer full of miscellaneous tools
and forks and knives in the kitchen so
you're gonna dump all that out you're
gonna get rid of all your reference
books you're gonna get rid of the
accumulation of perhaps a century or
maybe several centuries in your
grandmother's house of potentially
useful objects so you're not prepared
you know raising kids also involves all
kinds of preparedness I remember I had
this huge bin just full of different
toys to play with with my daughter she
gets bored of one toy you go to the bin
you get something else out yummy I mean
you know tools are not always
necessarily of that that most pragmatic
of varieties but why is
at that all of your plans why is it that
the way you define your life and your
lifestyle what you buy what you own and
what you use is simply linked to what
gives you joy or in other words what
gives you the most enjoyment this is
still consumerism and this is still
maximizing it's not minimalism its
maximalism it is simply maximizing your
enjoyment of how you spend your money
how you spend your time how you live a
life of passive capitalist
self-indulgence and that's not an ethic
or an aesthetic that I'm interested in
and I think we can contrast that to an
approach to use a word that's that's
associated with the philosophy of John
Dewey but it's being used by many
philosophers we can contrast that to
instrumental ISM instrumentalism would
be looking at things as a means to an
end so why do I have this tool why do I
have this solid metal of tether why do I
have this you know drawer full of tools
there are means to an end no they're not
part of my identity I understand the
part of minimalism is a rebellion
against the concept that the things you
own define who you are okay but my
response to that is say no the things I
own don't define who I am but they
define the challenges that I'm prepared
for they enable me to cope they enable
me to solve problems and I want to own
things that will be problem solving
including problems that I can't foresee
and that I can't anticipate I'm
interested in robustness and ever guard
these things merely as means to hand but
finally my third and final point here is
that I really think the danger of
minimalism and when I see it invoked in
the vegan political context is that I
regard this minimalism as a form of
phony asceticism a full a form of phony
asceticism
it's a form of phony asceticism that
really just becomes an accoutrement for
a life of self-indulgence and because of
my background and put a scholarship I
have seen a lot of that I have seen a
lot of phony asceticism invoked as
glorifying a life that principally is
still just about wealth about one's own
happiness about indulging one's own
moods and fantasies and desires it's
based on gratifying one's own desires
and that has nothing to do with the
things I care about passionately which
to some extent are ethical and to some
extent or idiosyncratic you guys
everybody say I care about the fact that
Cree in a jib way are going extinct in
Canada another indigenous language in
Canada is Ottawa the Ottawa language at
this point it already is extinct maybe
there are 10 people who can still speak
that language maybe not even 10 some of
our languages I care about that it's
partly ethical it's partly intellectual
it reflects all kinds of things but I
completely admit that's partly
idiosyncratic it has nothing to do with
owning things and it has nothing to do
with refusal to own things to me the
aesthetic you're painting over the top
of a consumerist life within capitalism
it's at best irrelevant to all the
things that for me are definitive and
shape my direction in life in terms of
humanitarian engagement in terms of my
political motivations in terms of vegan
activism or in terms of my involvement
with humanitarian work with language
research with history with politics with
any of these things by just say again
that's not just dumb it's dangerous and
maybe I'm uniquely qualified to say how
that kind of delusion is dangerous
because of my background in Buddhism but
yes the story you tell yourself that by
becoming a minimalist or by becoming a
digital nomad you know the digital
nomads are even closer to the permanent
vacation paradigm that you are doing
something morally different from an and
morally superior to someone who you know
shall we say accumulates or curates a
collection of things I do think it's
dangerous and I do think this it
ultimately becomes a way for
middle-class people to look down their
noses and sneer at the clutter of
someone who may really have good reason
to have a meal do you repair cars if you
do something productive with your
possessions like repairing cars then you
probably have a house full of clutter
you have a garage full of clutter
throughout full of miscellaneous tools
and what have you
and you know I think that in 2016 with
the rise of digital technology I think
that in reality what we're looking at is
a hyper self-indulgent middle-class who
have become totally alienated from the
means of production from the reality of
what it is to roll up your sleeves and
repair your own car what it is to be
prepared in all those ways big and small
whether it's the steel tow cable or the
you know container what have you and who
think that ultimately to their superior
to their own parents because they've
chosen this mode of you know living in
luxury that ultimately makes them more
fragile more brittle less prepared to
deal with unforeseen circumstances not
only is it that they can't fix their own
car they won't be able to cope with
anything without logging into their
computer going onto the internet and
ordering the tools they need on Amazon
and then waiting for them to arrive to
close this video you know for me um of
course I mean it's needlessly if you
guys watch this channel you know me at
all I don't define my life but my
possessions but there is a real sense in
which you need to have the humility to
recognize the practical ways in which
your possessions do to find your life I
can't be a scholar of Buddhism without
owning certain books and I did own those
books in the past and I physically
carried those books with me and I had
the books shipped from Sri Lanka to
Thailand and from Thailand to Canada if
you want to be a serious scholar of
Buddhism there are some heavy books you
must possess and carry around and there
is a very real sense and we
I lose my identity as a buddhist scholar
and i lose the capacity to do original
research and buddhism when i give up
those books when i threw those books
away which i had to do in the same way
that i think a craftsman loses part of
us identity when he loses his tools and
he loses the capacity to actually carve
a piece of wood into a statue or to
actually repair or something right so I
understand minimalists wanting to rebel
against the feeling that what they own
defines who they are but my point my
perspective in terms of instrumentalism
is that instead we can just have a
humble and down-to-earth attitude that
what we own defines who we are in as
much as what we own defines what we can
do